good evening the Jewish High Holidays
have just ended and one of my dearest
friends in Chicago Abe treeger sent me a
little poem that he found on the margin
of his prayer book because he said it
reminded him of me it's a poem by Rose
Osterlund
my room has many doors each opens into
another room with many doors without a
word I walk from door to door from room
to room I hear my silence hear strange
voices and echo of words behind doors
that are shut where is the key the key
word we all know what the key word is
prevention
the consensus today is that prevention
is preferable to treatment yet actions
to make this happen are obscenely
lagging behind in the meantime previous
lives are lost resources wasted as
oncologists we are charged with
providing from diagnosis to death care
to our cancer patients that enhances
their quality of life reduces pain and
suffering how are we accomplishing that
and if not then why not and what can be
done to improve the outlook for future
patients are we truly appreciating the
deep track
today of cancer at an intimate
individual level the profound
devastation of families cancer social
and financial in fact it's searing
psychologic traumas above all are we
doing the best we can with available
options or should we be questioning some
of the draconian measures we are
practicing how good are the solutions we
offer if we constantly have to ask
ourselves whether cancer or the
treatment we prescribed will kill the
patient which of the two is worse using
chemotherapy mewn therapy and stem cell
transplant to cure cancer someone's
aptly observed is like beating the dog
with a baseball bat to get rid of its
please why is this the only choice we
offer hopes of finding better drugs
using the existing discovery platforms
are using even more artificial systems
of genetically engineered animals are as
realistic as dissecting the brain and
expecting to find and discover
consciousness after 50 years of
developing cancer drugs this way it's
time to reassess the preclinical model
no it's time to abandon this strategy
altogether
Jeremias alone or pointless unless a new
strategy accompanies the lamentation the
new strategy is to stop chasing after
the last cell and focus on eliminating
the first better still prevent the
appearance of the first cell by finding
its earliest footprints to begin the
ending we must end the beginning
prevention will be the only
compassionate universally applicable
cure it's not prevention through
lifestyle lifestyle changes individuals
with pristine eating and exercising
habits get cancer because cancer causing
mutations accumulate as natural
consequences of reproduction and aging
of cells the new strategy must go beyond
early detection as practice currently
through
mammograms and other routine streaming
tests the prevention I'm talking about
is through identification and
eradication of transformed cancerous
cells at their inception before they've
had a chance to organize into a bona
fide malignant incurable disease
this may seem as an unattainable utopian
dream but it's achievable in a
reasonable time we are already using
sophisticated technology to detect the
residues of disease that linger after
treatment the last cancer cell can we
not reverse the order of things and use
the tests to detect the first this was
the first facility
I thought this would lay the groundwork
for what's coming in the next hour or so
so there is practically no one in this
room today whose lives have not been
touched by cancer in one way or another
there are many cancer patients in the
room today I want you to know that this
book is not a doom and gloom book at all
in fact it is a very optimistic
forward-looking book in which we are
anticipating that things will not be as
they have been but rather we really have
an exciting new path to tread I think a
lot of people ask me dr. Rosser you're
making all these suggestions but how is
an entire field going to be able to
change and switch I think capitalism
here helps because it has is good points
in competition as long as we can fix a
goal and financially incentivize it
everybody will want to do it think about
the fact that everybody is trying to
develop more and more toxic therapies
where 95% of the clinical trials they
fund are going to fail they know it but
they're still investing billions of
dollars so if we show a different way
and set a new goal I think that that
would be a far more optimistic goal than
a 95% chance of failure and then of
course once you set the goal and the
object of desire Nazario the Jumba Shin
Megami bar head now guess key arcs A
through J they connect we one should
focus the eye sight on the object of
desire and when that happens even the
blinking of an eyelash is annoying wish
we could look at the below
with the eyes of the narcissist the
flower which of course doesn't blink the
great French essayist Montaigne said
something very beautiful in one of his
essays which I'd like to quote I who
boast of embracing the pleasures of life
so eagerly and so deliberately finding
them when I examine them so minutely
little more than wind but what of that
we are all wind and the wind itself
wiser than we takes its pleasure in
veering and blustering around content
with its function it does not seek
stability and solidity qualities that
don't belong to it in other words it's
exactly what Shakespeare also sold to
dine on self be true and then it follows
as the night the day thou canst be false
to any man I had to be sincere to myself
and simply write down what I experience
on a daily basis and as Rachel read that
passage saying suffering is what I see
on a daily basis so I decided that the
field has become too far removed from
patience we need to bring the patient
back front and center and look at
everything from the prison of human
anguish what is the agony that our
patients are going through when we
glibly talk about oh this drug has a 30%
chance of response first of all that
means you're giving a drug to someone
but seventy where 70% people will not
have any chance of response and then the
response
we lost not a great length of time it's
most of them are not curative now I'm
talking about advanced cancer 68% of
cancers that are diagnosed today are
cured and there has been a decline in
mortality by 26% that's a very good
message
I think seed planted that message
there's been as 26% fall in mortality
from the FDA but most of it is because
of early detection and people stopping
to smoke so in other words I do really
believe that everyone is anxious to help
the patients but we really are losing
the path by trying to understand every
signaling pathway so because my whole
life is spent as an oncologist seeing 30
to 40 patients every week for the last
35 years I'd like to read a passage from
chapter 5 which is dedicated to Jacy
who's a patient who I saw when I was 34
years old and she changed my way of
thinking dramatically I'll just end with
this passage I remember a day earlier in
her disease when Jacy was in an
uncharacteristically somber and
reflective mood she sighed and confessed
that she regretted not having valued her
family more when she was well she
specially mentioned the pointless inane
arguments with her live-in mother-in-law
over trivial issues leading to days of
unpleasantness facing a lethal illness
at the age of 34 Jacy wished for a
second chance so she could show everyone
the better angels of our nature
confinement by disease allowed her to
free her spirit made her more generous
to be in remission for a year one day
she was in clinic for a visit and
mischievously confessed that in the
middle of a recent georgia with her
mother-in-law she suddenly stopped in
her tracks and realized how normal she
must be feeling she had reverted to her
whining and title temperamentally
vacuous pre disease self and those are
some of my good points she groaned dr.
Raza I tried to emerge a pearl out of
the oyster of my illness instead I've
ended up impersonating the old crab
warning dr. Reza when you find me being
nice suspect relapse maybe it will
because those were my salad days maybe
it was JC's ravishing personality her
youthful stunning good looks of ulnar
ability as a new mother her wicked sense
of humor her poise her willingness to be
friends and school of fresh insecure
junior attending in ways of knowing
cancer ways of knowing life Aristotle
defined tragedy as a moment of discovery
the discovery has to be somehow purged
when Oedipus found that he had killed
his father and married his mother he had
to blind himself wandering off as some
kind of a prophet the years with JC
shattered me in ways I was not aware of
until I tried to put myself back
together the destruction and
reconstruction process painful stepwise
rehabilitation of my soul marked by many
false starts and regressions was my
covenant of blinding and unblinding
myself I stopped being the newly minted
warrior oncologist I emerged as someone
who was no longer startled by cancers
infinitely unpredictable testy tones
it's gruesome cruelties rather I became
an adult who had learned to stopped
winning the suffering of individual
patients the mystery of the world is the
visible as Oscar Wilde pointed out not
the invisible Jacy helped me make that
leap
from dallying in the abyss of cancers
ruthless nihilism to considerations of
more humanistic humanitarian issues of
life and death
JC gave no lectures she wrote no books
it was her sober acceptance of the
unspeakable tragedy in a thousand little
gestures that slowly but surely parted
the curtains allowing me to witness
grace in all its heroic splendor she
gave my eyesight the insight it needed
JC made the invisible visible
she opened entire new mysterious worlds
for me to wander in as I negotiated each
new patient who came with their own
unique set of cryptic and mysterious
challenges the best tribute I could pay
her when she died was to pledge my life
to study and cure the disease that took
hers if I have 72 more lives
I would pledge myself 72 more times - JC
if equal affection can not be let the
more loving one be me
[Applause]
thank you so much can we be heard in the
back and also would you want to test
your mic just make sure you can be heard
in the back can you hear me in the back
yes I thought I would also begin with
one of the one of the most beautiful
quotes poems in your book this is from
Emily Dickinson who writes I felt a
cleavage in my mind as if my brain had
splits I tried to match it seem by same
but could not make them fit the thought
behind I strove to join unto the thought
before but sequins raveled out of reach
like balls upon a floor I may be we
begin by asking you when your grain
began to split and when you felt that
that cleavage in your mind what tell me
the moment of off not the first cell at
the moment of the first book the moment
of the first page on this book ow
how did that happen what what drove you
to write a book here were full-time
career as an oncologist as a researcher
what would drove you what was that what
was that moment like it's really strange
said because I never considered myself
as a writer I still don't I'm an
oncologist and a scientist and it's the
last thing that would ever occur to me
to write but I think what forced me to
tell the story is shares are my
daughter's best friend Andrew Andrew was
22 years old and is diagnosed with an
aggressive kind of brain cancer sixteen
months later he is handed a form to sign
a DNR do not resuscitate form
and he didn't sign it he sent it back
how do you sign a DNR format 23 but that
evening when his father came to spend
the night with him he called them back
and signed the forms saying simply I
couldn't do it in the presence of my
mother and sister they are in this room
today and what happened that forced me
to finally tell this to the world is the
first thing he said after his surgery
when he was told that he has cancer
cause he told his mother don't worry mom
just call Azra she is on the cutting
edge of cancer she is going to find some
cure for me don't worry and I have felt
so ashamed since that day how are we
failing The Andrews and Umar's
and JC's of this world so I think it was
a very emotional and deeply painful
experience that really forced me to
start telling the stories and while
telling the stories ask the questions of
why are we here what are we doing with
this what the book is full of story
we'll come back to the stories in a
second
walk us through what what you imagine
might happen in the future
to someone who has brain cancer but
let's pause that thought for a second
let's let's walk the the audience a
little bit to the landscape of of cancer
diagnosis and treatment walk us in the
United States for the last 10 years as
to what has happened epidemiologically
what if give us a landscape view of
what's happened where they
successes and what the failings have
been that's a question that should be
close to everybody's heart because
cancer is something that one in three
men and one in two men and one in three
women are likely to get so the incidence
of cancer increases with age our
population is aging and that's a good
thing but that's putting everybody at
high risk of cancer stop for a second as
you know let's say that statistic is
true right so one into one and three
this is basically in other words
something that is bound to affect your
life how many people in this audience
are totally familiar with the landscape
of cancer this is the one disease in
other words how many people know what's
happened in the last 20 or years to the
changing or altering epidemiology of
cancer it's about 1 in every 5 1 in
every 10 is that that sounds proximately
so tell us so what has happened so
disease of aging increasing in disease
of aging and the problem second problem
is that despite billions of dollars
spent in research and millions of papers
we are still using the same strategies
to treat cancer chemotherapy radiation
therapy and surgery except for rare
exceptions which are working in small
rare types of cancers this is the
backbone of cancer treatment today 68%
of cancers are cured today 68% are cured
but how with Slash poison and burn and
so it's not a painless procedure my
question is why after 50 years are we
still using these draconian things first
of all even though we are Kay curing 68%
people we don't need to pat ourselves on
the back and give eachother gold medals
for it and the second problem is the 30
plus percent who are diagnosed when
the disease is advanced their chances of
survival are pretty much the same as
they were 50 years ago
that's the landscape and then to now
take Andrews case and or Jaycees case
how would you like to see that landscape
different walk walk us through the so
what might what might happen
scientifically and we'll talk about what
might happen on a human level but what
might happen scientifically how would
you like to see that change and then
let's talk about some of the challenges
that those changes will will bring with
them sometimes the most visible things
are the most invisible to us and one of
the things that Andrews case really
drove home to me is that no age is
immune from cancer and the second thing
is that it is a painless killer the
disease can be so advanced in your body
and you have no idea what's going on we
think we know our bodies no we don't at
all and so the idea is that why are we
waiting for it to to have reached a
stage where it was inoperable
unresectable
so what would what's it and you have
done and what should people do if they
intend what what's what should have been
done what could have been done I think
what we need to do now is to start
thinking about how to change this the
whole landscape from anybody being
detected lead to everybody being
detected early how do we do that so far
we have brought down cancer mortality
just by very gross screening measures
like mammography pap smears PSA
colonoscopy that's made a big difference
you diagnose cancers early and you treat
them early but those are very gross
measures done annually I am saying we
should be treating the human body like a
machine and constantly monitoring it for
the appearance of any kind of diseases
disease
in fact the way I see the future
healthcare going is all towards
prevention and proactive measures rather
than treatment so should she and who
have had scans while he was asymptomatic
what do you mean by these practice yes I
think so what we need to do is use the
latest technology whether it's scanning
and imaging or devices or development of
biomarkers from blood and saliva and
sweat and tears and breath and urine and
stool from everything we should be able
to monitor so the way I imagine the
future to be would be that we need to go
now and use serious rigorous scientific
methods to develop the technologies that
will be unraveled the earliest
footprints of cancer so let's say that
we start monitoring blood and saliva and
urine at regular intervals right now
from healthy individuals for the next
ten years well some of them will develop
multiple sclerosis somebody will develop
cancer somebody so what was that that
happened nine 10 years ago before their
diagnosis how can we develop these
technology so what we are working on is
trying to combine all these measures
together eventually so that ideally what
would happen to a future andrew is that
even an inch I'll diz born even in
infancy we are able to implant a chip or
a device under the skin which is
constantly able to test for the
appearance of abnormal whether it's
proteins or it's cell free DNA or its
micro RNA or it is a barcode for various
proteins associated with brain cancer or
bone marrow tumors or breast cancers we
should have the technology to do all
this and this is where we need to do
imagine the future Andrews to be now
some of these technologies have been
invented in the past you've mentioned
breast mammogram we mentioned the pap
smear you mentioned the PSA test and
their record has been quite mixed so the
mammography for instance if you look at
the look at mammography over the years
everyone beautifully does their
mammogram and the impact on survival but
from mammography alone has been
extraordinarily minimal the PSA is much
worse in fact the PSA actually increased
the incidence of prostate cancer and
called hundreds of thousands of biopsies
the best example of this is there's a
famous story of doctors in South Korea
were sold ultrasound devices and they
began to use the ultrasound devices to
monitor for thyroid cancer the incidence
of thyroid cancer went up 1,000% in the
number of deaths from from thyroid
cancer went up went up by what
percentage zero zero so in other words
they were finding lots and lots of
cancers which were not likely to kill
you the opposite end of the spectrum of
course are pap smears which are which
absolutely save lives and other
detection technologies so what level of
confidence should we have that we will
not go down the same road again
and and do two things one of them is
cause patients the toxicity of
overdiagnosis so imagine a young Andrew
and suddenly it your chip find something
and then you know an incidental shadow
is found on his in his brain and you
know one thing leads to another biopsy
etc etc so there's a toxicity to the
patient and secondly how do we prevent a
big financial toxicity that will come to
the healthcare system in general if
everyone was everyone in this room had a
device for a scan we would bust the the
bank how can we be confident that the
new era will bring
these changes what produces this
confidence yeah Innes said I have to
confess that for a while when I was
growing up in my family the definition
of a bum was anyone over 18 not going to
medical school I have lots of siblings
who are doctors and my younger sister is
at the Brigham the radiologist member
book is the acknowledged test book on my
mongrel field
surah rasa and she and I have this
conversation very often about an emag
Rafi and its place and she literally has
a fit whenever I say over diagnoses over
treatment because she says okay just
putting in a needle to do a fine needle
aspirate if I find something abnormal
that is supposed to be much more hurtful
than finding a cancer that spread all
over for God's sake she doesn't accept
this at all secondly I have to also
agree with you that these techniques for
screening have been milked to their
maximum benefit that's it we are not
going to get anywhere more with them but
that those are not the gross techniques
I am talking about why in this day and
age with such sophisticated technology
available that there are I mean
everything on iCloud everything that we
do these days is just done by a super
sophisticated technology why not use all
of those to now use them in in
developing the tests that we need for
early detection and let's say that my
chip that I have implanted in somebody
detects an abnormal cell why should we
rely on a single test to be the ultimate
answer for trouble that should then be
supplemented by 20 other tests is there
if there is an abnormal cell is the cell
indicating a potentially lethal illness
or not and if yes then what is the
aggressiveness of that disease all those
things we should be able to distinguish
between then you talk about the
financial burden many people ask me dr.
Azhar isn't it true that now the pharma
companies are going to be very upset
with you because I am saying that a lot
of the drugs that they are developing
are not helping patients in fact they
are hurting a lot more patients than
they have but absolutely not I don't
agree with that because in fact in
reality right now the pharma companies
only have to deal with individuals who
have cancer and there is 1.7 million new
cancer patients that are diagnosed every
year but if we start monitoring every
healthy individual there will be the
whole country at their disposal and then
think about it that sequencing the human
genome first time around took 15 years
and a billion dollars and today we do it
in a week for how much thousand dollars
a thousand dollars this is the beauty of
capitalism at some level that within 20
years the sequencing that cost a billion
dollars costs a thousand dollars today
everybody gets vaccinated are we going
to be concerned about the economic
crisis that's going to come but anyway
what about the average cancer drug today
that's helping 20 to 30-percent patients
for five months median costs hundred
thousand dollars a year aren't we
wasting all these resources aren't we
hurting patients right now we are
worried about oh we might detect
somebody early and over diagnose over
treat no we shouldn't be doing that
either we should protect every
individual today
when I drug works in 30% patience this
is called a game-changer things are
proclaimed from the rooftops but has
some ants when I criticized this in one
of our meetings at Columbia University
somebody said to be melasma you may
think so but my patient lived for eight
months and those eight months really
mattered because the patient was able to
go and visit and attend his grandson's
graduation and I couldn't agree more
with this that of course it matters even
eight months matter even two months of
improvement in survival matter but first
of all didn't even think about the 80%
patients who had to take the same drug
and did not respond at all but suffered
all the toxicities and 42% people in
this country today if they are diagnosed
with cancer 42% will become completely
financially ruined at two plus years I
have patients said who will travel from
New Jersey by train and subway with the
hemoglobin of five and six grams because
they cannot afford to take a cab because
all their money is where is it going who
is benefiting from this and we can't
just keep blaming pharmaceutical
companies all of us are to be blamed the
wastage is terrible so why are why
aren't people looking at what is
happening now the country is going
bankrupt it is an unsustainable health
care system right now especially in
oncology we should be really looking at
this and if nothing comes out of my book
although the solution is right in the
title the first cell but you can ignore
even the title if nothing else comes out
at least understand what the problem is
because right now the issue isn't that
we don't have a solution for cancer the
issue for me is that we
not even appreciating the problem in all
its entirety so at least we should be
able to come to terms take off the
blinders and see what we are doing
what's what is your what has been your
sense of the attempts thus far you find
the first these first cells so now there
are you know as the as the as the field
is moved forward there are companies
there are efforts the NIH is leading an
effort the companies like Grail that are
leading efforts to find the mutations in
circulating DNA for instance but most of
those studies may be the first
generation studies have not come out to
be resounding successes is that because
of a systemic problem in the way the
studies are done are we wait are we
doing something wrong there in other
words let's say that that one signed you
up to now direct the the first cell
center which of course I've initiated
but well how would you change course
even among the believers I think we have
to do the science there is just no
getting away from it and science costs
money I started my career in 1977 when I
came to this country but did my
residency and fellowship and then in the
eighties I started serious study and
treatment of oncology patients and I
started by treating acute myeloid
leukemia but within seven years it was
clear to me that in my lifetime this
disease will not be cured it is so
vicious and aggressive so the only thing
I knew was okay let's try to diagnose it
early and stop intercept before it
reaches this end-stage monstrosity and
so I started paying attention to pre
leukemia and following these patients
along the natural history of their
diseases as they progress towards acute
leukemia pre leukemias are called
myelodysplastic syndromes and the third
of these patients can develop into a
cutie Mia as soon as I decided to do
that here is where being an immigrant
tree
helped me because had I gone to school
in this country the next step would be
to make an animal model to study the
disease but I was a naive Pakistani
young person who didn't know any better
and I said if I'm going to study this
disease I need sense so I just started
saving bone marrow and blood cells on my
patients and putting them into a bank
and today that tissue Bank has over
60,000 samples from thousands of
patients studied longitudinally many
patients are sitting in this room today
which is so humbling for me who have
given me cells 10 years ago and now
continue to give those their samples
that are banked so the idea is now that
technology has evolved now that we have
all the tissue samples why not go ahead
and apply the technology to see what
caused this progression working our way
backwards to pre leukemia and then who
are the patients who are susceptible to
get even MDS or pre leukemia why did
they get it was there a particular
genetic makeup germline DNA polymorphism
that they were born with was what made
them at risk of this disease and once we
identify let's say 5,000 patients in the
tissue Bank have an extra chromosome 8
abnormality and those who had extra
chromosome 8 many of them tended to have
a particular kind of DNA they were born
with
well once we identify that now we can go
to the kind of public domains where
sequences of normal individuals are
present and see how many have that
abnormality and that's why how you move
to now from pre leukemia to start
screening healthy individuals so I think
for me the road is very clear-cut we
need to study samples of human tissue
not try to create an abnormal disease in
animals and try to study that we have to
study human samples using the
latest technology we cannot cut corners
they will be many slip betwixt her pen
lip but hey we have to keep going this
is why I'm so excited young people are
in the room today they have to keep
carrying on and doing this rigorous
science and I think the the the kind of
technology the Grail and other things
that you mentioned they are in their
infancy of course it will take some time
for us to develop but what we have to do
is stop wasting all the resources on
things that are not helping people
especially our patient that's why in the
book I make a big distinction between
disease and illness disease is something
that doctors diagnose and they treat
illness is something that patients are
going through we have become almost
blind to the illness part we are so
focused on trying to find a cure for the
disease even for 20% patients that we
really have ended up distancing
ourselves from our very first rule that
we are taught as doctors first do no
harm
we are harming our cancer patients and I
think that enough is enough
going forward we have to change yeah
it's a it's a it's an incredible it is
an incredible profession that holds at
as its primary model something in the
negative don't do something most
professions encourage you to do things
ours encourages us not to do something
and that's because not not this is then
it's not a joke it's because of the
magnitude there is no other profession
that carries the magnitude of the burden
of no one has given has been given the
invasiveness and and the power that that
medicine has been given no other
profession has been given that that
special special power in Tucson and what
a beautiful book you have written about
the history of all this
it's it's you know I'm SIDS greatest
admirer and in my opinion there is no
better science writer ever been said
Mukherjee I say this to him all the time
but because I think that the way Sid has
really put together the whole story and
the emperor of all maladies was also an
eye-opening thing for me because just
reading everything in one place it was
an amazing tour de force that you came
up so I agree completely that that I
think the whole the whole field has been
do's and dont's but yet we are not
getting anywhere so I'm not saying I
have all the answers first of all I'm
defining the problem better at least
based on my patients anguish and not
just Andrew and Omer who I yes yes so I
think that that I think all of these
examples of patients tell us that at
least it's time to accept the way things
are being done as if there's an inherent
righteousness ending right I mean
there's something very very moving of
course right from the beginning because
I mean the subject of the book was very
moving to me it says that the human cost
of pursuing cancer to the last you know
you you might come to this book thinking
that this book is about dying but by the
end of the book you realize this book is
about living and this book is about
about it is not about it's not only
about compassion around dying it is
being compassionate among those who live
right the and so one of the most
interesting things in in this book is
that there are so many visible patients
that you begin to then think about the
invisible patients or rather what you
might call the invisible pre patients
the people who haven't yet developed and
and that's one of the to me that was one
of the very
can the deep mysteries of this book and
not the great really I should say powers
of reading the book is that there was
Story upon story upon story of people
who succumbed and therefore there it
becomes a critic or it becomes a cry
from the heart about trying to not make
everyone into those stories how do we
prevent this from happening how do we
not not have them before we open up to
the audience tell us most people have
heard this tell us about your own
transformation as you as you watched
Harvey through his through his illness I
mean this is a very personal journey for
you this is not someone else's you're
not just writing as an oncologist you're
writing as a wife and as a mother tell
us that story and then we open up to the
audience and tell us what Cora talk to
you how could we what what should we
have done differently shares up my
daughter was only four years old when
Harvey was diagnosed and eight when he
died and few weeks after he died she
developed the flu or something and she
has suffers from severe asthma so she
was that got aggravated she was very
sick high fevers but four or five days
later she started to improve and yet one
morning I'm sitting in the living room
and working and suddenly eight-year-old
Shahzad came out crying hysterically
unconsolable
I was convinced that she has had a
relapse she's worse but it was
impossible for her to stop crying
finally when she got a hold of herself
all she could say was mom actually I am
feeling fine now
but now I know how terrible it feels to
be sick and how good it feels to get
better but my dad never got better
that really struck me that an eight year
old is able to empathize so deeply that
her father although he took every care
possible not to let on the whole
contingent of people are here from
Chicago right
Laxmi Vila Naomi Shivan they all saw me
going through this they were there the
whole time and we were in this together
in a way when you are actually in the
situation cancer is such a dizzying
disorienting thing because as hobby'
himself pointed out no sooner do you get
used to one situation that things change
and then you have to reorient yourself
all over again
Harvie son mark is here shares our
desire of course and his daughter Sarah
and Vanessa couldn't come but they were
there the entire time and yet nobody
could appreciate how much pain herbie
went through it and i couldn't
appreciate how much pain other cancers
patients go through until i shared a bed
with a cancer patient and saw the
suffering
did it change me as an oncologist I
don't think so sit because I always have
taken care of my patients the same way
but it certainly changed my eyes forever
everything around me was the same but my
eyes changed and my perceptions changed
entirely well thank you for setting
setting the entire world straight and
thank you for identifying the problem
and thank you
for showing us where the where the
gaping holes are there's a there's an
Emperor's New Clothes quality about this
book and so another Tiger could have
been the Emperor of all maladies without
any clothes but but what kind of
response have you maybe the last
question what kind of response have you
gotten from the from the cancer
community how how has it reacted it's a
very provocative book what is the what
is the reaction then what what are
people your uncle your oncologist
colleagues your friends your that the
folks you know at the National
Institutes what's that what's the
reaction been I think very positive
reaction is because it seems like
everyone's ready to hear this right so
there will be some disgruntled people
I'm sure but I haven't heard from them
nor will you we we have time for
questions from the audience please ask
but yes of course you're gonna say a few
words of thanks I asked for a moment to
just thank a few people before we
proceed with opening this to the
audience so I want to begin by thanking
Rachel who has been a dear friend for
all these years I have been in New York
and Asia Society for organizing this
amazing program and of course many
thanks to Sid the most multi-dimensional
individuals I have met all I can say is
that speaking about speaking about a
book on cancer in his presence felt like
bragging about a flood in the presence
of Noah
thanks to all my patients many of you
are here tonight as our families of many
of those who are not with us special
thank you to my dearest friend Naheed us
for mother of Omir in chapter one
despite every effort to travel from
Karachi and be here tonight now he had
to cancel a trip at the last minute a
very special thanks to Elena Andrews
mother and two cats lutzky his sister
who along with Shahrazad co-authored the
andrew story thanks to the leadership of
Columbia University and the
administrative staff the nurses
researchers oncologists they are simply
the best people to work with many of you
are here thank you
a special thanks to dr. Abdul Ali the
current director of the LEAs
translational research lab and to dr.
Naomi Galilee the previous director
these are two of the most brilliant
scientists and best friends that I could
ask for and a big thanks to mr. Mohammad
Mumtaz who has been meticulously
maintaining and guarding the tissue
repository with his life for two decades
Thank You Mumtaz gee thanks to all the
folks at basic books Lera TJ lives
Kelsey Nancy Rachel Melissa thank you so
much of course thanks to my siblings my
sister-in-law Nazli my nieces and
nephews who've all been cheering me on
throughout my life and now through the
process of the book I want to single out
my younger brother Abbas to thank Abbas
resides the founder of the
internationally acclaimed website three
quarks daily he has been my best editor
since he turned 19
very tough he published shorter and
abbreviated versions of several chapters
on three quarks daily website starting
eighteen years ago with Harvey's
obituary a deep gratitude is owned -
Harvey's children Sarah and Mark and
Vanessa I want to thank my daughter
Shahrazad besides the love support and
encouragement she gives me cher has done
the audio version of the book as well
it's really great I recommend it when I
arrived in America as a 24 year old
immigrant I found a warm and welcoming
home here I understood the meaning for
the first time of what a manual contest
said which is that Hospitality means the
right of a stranger not to be treated as
a stranger it is because of this spirit
of hospitality in America that I can say
to shares earth and to all the young
people in this room do not give in to
darkness being forecast in your future
instead live up to the uniquely generous
spirit of this country be aware that in
this theater of life it is reserved only
for God and for angels to be lookers-on
for the rest of us it is essential to
become alive and work very very hard to
carve out our own destinies and no
country will give you a better chance
than the United States
so I thank the US for helping me educate
myself and to the audience I would like
to end by saying or quoting from Alfred
Lord Tennyson the long day weighs the
slow moon rises the deep moons round
with many voices come my friends it's
not too late to seek a newer world for
my purpose
hold to sail beyond all the bands of
stars in the western sky it may be we
shall touch the Happy Isles maybe we
shall see the great Achilles whom we
knew well though much is taken much
abides and tho we are not now that force
which in olden days moved heaven and
earth that which we are we are one equal
temper of heroic heart's made weak by
time and fate but strong in will to
strive to seek to find and not to yield
yes I'd like to make it as brief as I
can if I don't please I apologize first
of all thank you very much dr. Reza for
a very thought-provoking and stimulating
talk and you book while it talks about
the person of that cell the human that
is probably the most important in it
tell me Katie you mentioned this book is
not about dying but about living someone
who is extremely close why were you so
calm for cancer said it was very easy to
know that I only died what's difficult
is not knowing as a pathologist dr.
Izadi
landscape that you paint with there we
doing care to be cancer testing and what
you're saying does not only apply to
cancer but just apply to every inherited
and acquired disease the ethical
question that I'd like to ask is we will
find the genetic mutation where they
inherited environmental by screening and
the industry the capitalist industry is
finding that's where the money is lie
and slowly those millions of dollars
being put into it are becoming billions
of dollars but the ethical question is
what do we do with that do with then
taking start taking out imperfect cells
modifying them and start putting them
into the body again or we just wait and
follow it said and monitor with a bar
tag and say that when the genotypic
expression has converted into the
phenotypic expression at the first point
treated what do you and how do you
handle that how would you handle I just
want to make sure he's read the book
I'll let you do the major answering of
the question but of course I mean a lot
of the a lot of it is in you have you
you make many many points over and over
again that a spectrum of things could be
done a spectrum of actions could be
taken and that might include giving
earlier therapy more directed therapy it
might include early detection and
removal of the cell it might include
modifications in the environment that
prevents such cells from happening in
the first place there might be immune
modifications that that are involved dr.
Ali and dr. Raza and I are involved in a
probably one of the most exciting
projects in my life very much along
those lines to change the cells using
gene editing tools and putting them back
in the body so you can make you can then
treat MDS and AML it's probably the most
exciting project and dr. Lee has led
that project now for four years so
really this the whole spectrum has been
you know is available what are your
thoughts very I agree that this is the
way we are going and using more than one
technology that's correct
maybe we have one type of one last
question and then we don't
don't want to miss the chance to see
this short short clip of the film hi dr.
Rosa um I just started medical school
and you touched on this a little bit
already but I wanted to know considering
the very somewhat divided healthcare
landscape the landscape that my
generation is inheriting what would you
suggest would be the way to get around
making the vision that you've put in
this book a reality because of course
there's a research to be done but
there's also like the public opinion
that you have to sway and the hurdles
that you have to face so yeah what would
be your advice that's a wonderful
question from a budding physician I'm
very realistic about what we can do my
life has been committed to early
detection of leukemia since 1984 fat lot
of good I have done I feel very
depressed about it I feel embarrassed
having the same conversations with my
patients and especially in front of
Andrew I couldn't look at myself in the
mirror for really it was so embarrassing
to be so nothing is going to change
overnight but we have to keep trying I
have been giving Grand Rounds and tumor
boards and dinner lectures and morning
talks and speaking on podcasts and NPR
and on television and every possible
venue I could find people listen to me
they agree with me then they go back
home and keep doing the same thing the
most important thing is however
awareness and education and this book
the first cell is the latest weapon in
my assault on getting people to to be
shaken into taking their blinders off
and looking at reality what
young person do I always say the same
thing sin which is educate yourselves
and educate everyone around you your job
is to become as fantastic a physician as
possible and it's not going to happen
overnight because every patient is going
to teach you something you didn't know
and you should be open to that
experience but you should continuously
seek knowledge and make sure that
everybody around you is also involved in
critically looking at the issues
honestly and with a will towards
cooperation rather than competition and
as I said if enough of us really start
talking about it this can happen I'll
give you one small example today if I
wanted to study just 200 patients at two
time points from the tissue repository
at the state of pre leukemia and acute
leukemia two time points but using all
the current genomics proteomics
transcriptome makes metabolomics all
these technologies it would cost us four
and a half million dollars dr. Lee
sitting here who shows me the bill
four and a half million dollars to study
200 patients samples if I want to study
several thousand that's 100 million
dollars no one is going to give it to me
well the people who should be interested
in finding this first cell most
anxiously are those people who are at
risk of developing cancer do you know
that the people who are at highest risk
of developing cancer are people who have
already had one cancer one in five new
cancers appear in people who already
have had one cancer in this country
today there are 20 million cancer
survivors almost even if just one
iliyan of those cancer survivors give me
$10 a month for a year that's a hundred
million dollars that can have the entire
tissue repository examined explored
interrogated and finding some of the
answers that we are looking for so until
there is a single breath left in my body
I'm going to keep saying the same thing
and fighting the good fight and as a
young person what's my advice to you you
have to become the best doctor that you
can and really take your patient
seriously
not just the disease part but the
illness part take care of the whole
patient and make sure that you are
looking at everything questioning
everything seriously I hope that answers
this
[Applause]